[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: with, a kitchen knife. A kitchen knife can also be used to kill people. It can't quite
[Amit Varma]: destroy an entire neighborhood, but you can take a life or two or three.
[Amit Varma]: My second question to you is, should the knife be banned? I rather suspect that I have the
[Amit Varma]: same answer to these two questions as most of you do. On the question of the bombzooka,
[Amit Varma]: the weapon that costs a thousand rupees and can blow up a neighborhood, yes, I believe
[Amit Varma]: the government should ban it. On the question of the knife, which is so useful to us, even
[Amit Varma]: essential to us in so many ways, no, I don't believe a knife should be banned. Ban the
[Amit Varma]: bombzooka, don't ban the knife. But this now brings me to my third question for you. If
[Amit Varma]: the bombzooka and the ordinary kitchen knife are part of a continuum in terms of the damage
[Amit Varma]: they cause, somewhere in that continuum is a line that we draw in terms of whether we
[Amit Varma]: ban it or not. Where do we draw that line? And why do we draw that line there?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. I hope you had time to think about that third question
[Amit Varma]: I asked. In case you haven't, pause this episode and think about it for a moment. Where do
[Amit Varma]: you draw the line between the kitchen knife and the bombzooka and decide that a weapon
[Amit Varma]: should be banned? My answer is that we draw the line depending on how much damage a weapon
[Amit Varma]: can cause. With a knife, you can kill at most two or three people before you are stopped,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even less. With a bombzooka, you can kill hundreds of people, even thousands in
[Amit Varma]: a crowded neighborhood or a mall or a marketplace. Where would I draw a line in between? Among
[Amit Varma]: potential weapons that exist at the moment, I would draw the line at a gun. As we have
[Amit Varma]: seen in recent years, it takes one nutcase to pick up a gun and go on a killing spree
[Amit Varma]: that can kill 10, 20, 30 people. Also, guns are widely used by people to kill themselves
[Amit Varma]: as they're an easy, relatively friction-free way to commit suicide. So I draw the line
[Amit Varma]: there. And I'd argue for the status quo in India where you cannot buy a gun off the counter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it might seem odd to you that a libertarian like me holds such a position. After all,
[Amit Varma]: libertarians in the USA argue vociferously for gun rights. Well, yeah, but I'd argue
[Amit Varma]: that there is context there in terms of how the USA evolved, the distrust of the state
[Amit Varma]: that is embedded in their culture as it should be in every culture, in fact, and that context
[Amit Varma]: doesn't quite apply to India. Also, my friend and a frequent guest on the show, Shruti Rajgopalan,
[Amit Varma]: once drew a two by two matrix for me on a piece of paper and showed me two kinds of
[Amit Varma]: equilibria. In one equilibrium, criminals plus cops have guns and so do common citizens
[Amit Varma]: to defend themselves. In another, neither criminals plus cops nor common citizens have
[Amit Varma]: guns. The other two possibilities are situations where cops and criminals have guns, but citizens
[Amit Varma]: don't to defend themselves. And citizens have guns, but cops don't. The argument could be
[Amit Varma]: made that both of these are unstable situations, and you need to be in one of two equilibria.
[Amit Varma]: Either everyone can have a gun or no one has a gun. The USA is in the first equilibrium,
[Amit Varma]: India is in the second. And while I don't have enough knowledge to take a position on
[Amit Varma]: the US equilibrium, I believe that India needs to stay in the second one. So my position
[Amit Varma]: that the sale of guns should not be legal applies to India for now, which is the society
[Amit Varma]: I live in and know and think I understand. So I speak in this context alone. Now my guests
[Amit Varma]: in the show are two men who have both studied law and economics, and they both disagree
[Amit Varma]: with me in different subtle ways. Shubho Roy is a fellow at the NIPFP. Sudhanshu Neema
[Amit Varma]: works at the Center for Civil Society. In the conversation you're about to listen to
[Amit Varma]: both of them are going to make great arguments against the position I just outlined. They
[Amit Varma]: might convince me or they might not. But before we go to the conversation, let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford
[Amit Varma]: to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors is a company that licenses images of
[Amit Varma]: the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India and adapts them into objects
[Amit Varma]: of everyday use. These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion
[Amit Varma]: covers and table runners and accessories like tote bags. This allows art lovers to actually
[Amit Varma]: get fine art into their homes at an accessible price. And artists get royalties on sales
[Amit Varma]: just like authors do. What's more, Indian colors now has an exciting range of new products,
[Amit Varma]: including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of
[Amit Varma]: mango wood. Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo, Ex Vazvo, Brinda
[Amit Varma]: Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate
[Amit Varma]: and festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head
[Amit Varma]: on over to Indian colors.com. That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 20% discount,
[Amit Varma]: apply the code IBM 20. That's IBM for IBM podcast IBM 20 for a 20% discount at Indian
[Amit Varma]: colors.com. Shubho, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you, Amit. So Shubho, tell
[Guest 1]: me I mean, what's your answer to the three questions I posed? I would like to squirm
[Guest 1]: around and say the question of banning is a very simplistic understanding of how law
[Guest 1]: operates. You would argue that the Indian Army should have the bomb Zuka. And that goes
[Guest 1]: on to say, for example, nuclear weapons, which is correct. But at the end of the day, if
[Guest 1]: you take a nuclear weapon, bomb Zuka, or some of the weapons that are there, while it is
[Guest 1]: licensed, it's at the end of the day in the hand of one individual, somebody in the army,
[Guest 1]: somebody in the Air Force, or maybe a group of people in the Air Force or army when it
[Guest 1]: comes to nukes, because we keep them disassembled, have the system to launch and destroy. And
[Guest 1]: those are individual citizens of India who have access to weapons of mass destruction.
[Guest 1]: Yes, they have joined the army, but we should not think that the army has complete control
[Guest 1]: all the time. And on the other hand, on the knife, if you gave a knife to a three year
[Guest 1]: old child or a five year old child, or your child, you would be put away for child endangerment
[Guest 1]: in any society. So you see, at both ends, there are exceptions. And we should start
[Guest 1]: thinking about from this context that the context of ban, absolute clear ban is kind
[Guest 1]: of extreme in law and usually does not serve our purpose. And that is why, for example,
[Guest 1]: we have legislatures to debate these issues multiple number of times and come with graded
[Guest 1]: intervention. So even a knife to a child is illegal, and you should go to jail for child
[Guest 1]: endangerment if you leave a large number, let your child play with knives. And on the
[Guest 1]: other hand, even a bomb Zuka is not illegal in the hands of a fighter pilot or soldier,
[Guest 1]: or somebody who has been licensed and carry has the power to do that. And those person
[Guest 1]: could still go on rampage, but we have created systems and processes hopefully to prevent
[Guest 1]: that. And so these are the two extremes, but at neither extremes, do you get a clear ban
[Amit Varma]: or a clear allowance?
[Amit Varma]: I think when I use the term ban, I mean, these would be commonly understood exceptions. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, everybody gets it that okay, the army is going to have weapons and you can't give
[Amit Varma]: weapons or even anything that could potentially be used as a weapon to a child. So these are
[Amit Varma]: kind of understood and also the fact that the army has these weapons and it consists
[Amit Varma]: of individuals who could also have homicidal urges and go berserk is not really an argument
[Amit Varma]: for letting everybody have them right because the probabilities rise exponentially if you
[Amit Varma]: let the common citizenry.
[Guest 1]: True. So all I'm saying is that there's a grading.
[Amit Varma]: I get that.
[Guest 1]: And in that grading once I think now I would argue that the guns come in somewhere in that
[Guest 1]: grading where in the Indian context, we have kind of done it very dumb, that we have done
[Guest 1]: it very simply and said ban. Instead of that, I would say you do grading for similarly for
[Guest 1]: guns and the guns fall in that continuum and depending on the usage of the gun, depending
[Guest 1]: on who has the gun, you do the systems and as you pointed out correctly that the American
[Guest 1]: system is one end of it, no licensing, no registration. But the Indian system is at
[Guest 1]: the other extreme of it, that unless some civil servant is convinced that your life
[Guest 1]: is in danger, you cannot purchase a gun. It is not a judicial process. It is not a process
[Guest 1]: which is subject to review in the normal system that we understand it. You don't get a reasoned
[Guest 1]: order as to whether your life is in, why your life is not in danger when you apply for it.
[Guest 1]: So it creates a large amount of discretion to that entity which gives you the license.
[Guest 1]: So we do not have a situation where as you pointed out, nobody has guns. We have a large
[Guest 1]: number of guns in the Indian system floating around. So the interesting statistics here
[Guest 1]: is that there are about 97 lakh registered guns in India, which is one per hundred.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know that. That's a lot of guns.
[Guest 1]: Wait, there are around 7.1 crore total guns in India, which gives you a number of five
[Guest 1]: per hundred. US is the other extreme just for context is 120 per hundred, but there
[Guest 1]: are many countries above us. So what we get is around 6 crore guns in this country, which
[Guest 1]: are unregistered. And these people who own them, not all of them are criminals or horrible
[Guest 1]: people. But because we have created this extreme ban, there are a large number of people who
[Guest 1]: have guns because they've inherited it or when the law came in, they had the power to
[Guest 1]: hold guns. They didn't hand it over because they didn't want to or for whatever reasons.
[Guest 1]: And now they're completely criminalized. If they even come willingly to hand over the
[Guest 1]: guns, they are open to prosecution under the Arms Act, which carries seven years of imprisonment
[Guest 1]: and which is very dangerous because it's not even a compoundable offense that you can go
[Guest 1]: and say, look, I'm willingly gave up my gun. So please don't prosecute me. You're totally
[Guest 1]: at the mercy. And this point is very interesting. We have a gun to population ratio of five
[Guest 1]: guns per hundred people, not that gun free as we think India is.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of points to make here, questions to ask rather. One is that it is
[Amit Varma]: implied in the statistic that listen, actually, it's not that hard to get a gun in India,
[Amit Varma]: you can and I understand that, that you can if you want go out in the black market and
[Amit Varma]: figure out a way to get a gun. But there is a transaction cost, you have to make a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of effort, not everyone does that. And so, you know, it is much harder for you
[Amit Varma]: to get hold of a gun on impulse, whereas otherwise, you know, you could just take it out of your
[Amit Varma]: pocket. Also, the point is that a lot of gun killings, a lot of gun deaths rather that
[Amit Varma]: happen, even in the US are not sort of shootouts we see in the news, they could be domestic
[Amit Varma]: disputes and very often and this is a huge problem, they are suicides, there happens
[Amit Varma]: to be a gun in the house. And again, a gun is an easy way to commit suicide on an impulse,
[Amit Varma]: you can take a gun, put it at your head and press the trigger. And that happens a lot
[Amit Varma]: apparently. And it's much harder to actually go to a bridge and jump off or hang yourself
[Amit Varma]: with all the elaborate apparatus that involves and the fact that there's a little more effort
[Amit Varma]: involved in that makes it a little less unlikely. So I mean, I've kind of made two separate
[Amit Varma]: points, what do you feel about them?
[Guest 1]: So on the point that it is a little difficult to get it and makes it difficult for impulse
[Guest 1]: buyers to get it, I agree with you there. But if you had a fairly robust registration
[Guest 1]: system, where there was no discretion on that part, like whether you are facing a threat
[Guest 1]: or not, but there is still objective checks that you don't have any previous criminal
[Guest 1]: convictions, you don't have domestic violence complaints against you, you do not have XYZ
[Guest 1]: things against you're not on parole or something like that, or you're not being charged and
[Guest 1]: tried, you can create those checks and balances to make it a little more difficult to make
[Guest 1]: impulse buys. And it still allows people but once you have made a purchase, you're not
[Guest 1]: completely criminalized. Today, if you are under stress or think that something bad will
[Guest 1]: happen, you buy the gun and now you're a criminal forever. So now you have to hide it, you have
[Guest 1]: to be unsafe about it. But on the other hand, if you did that all of that and for example,
[Guest 1]: do a seven day gun safety course, go and do a medical checkup, go and get a NOC from your
[Guest 1]: wife, spouse or anybody who's living with you at home. These are some of the systems
[Guest 1]: which other countries do, which sometimes when we look from India seems like a ban,
[Guest 1]: like Canada does it you have to get a psychiatric checkup before you get it and they talk to
[Guest 1]: you and they check that you're not there your family has to people living with you have
[Guest 1]: to give an approval or no objection. And then you get it and that allows for example, to
[Guest 1]: take care of the first problem, which is the impulse buys. On suicide, I think yes and
[Guest 1]: no to that extent. There are many other ways to go and they are very painful. And if you
[Guest 1]: are a libertarian, you would argue if you want to finish off your life, it is your life.
[Guest 1]: I don't subscribe to that point of view. But I think suicide is a mental health problem.
[Guest 1]: And there are reasons for suicide. Japan has the highest suicide rate in the world in the
[Guest 1]: developed world, not much access to guns, people are putting themselves out with carbon
[Guest 1]: dioxide with a lot of other jumping off buildings. So when you have a suicide epidemic in a country,
[Guest 1]: you should start looking at what are the cultural reasons which cause it, I think the US is
[Guest 1]: also going through some problems which create the suicide epidemic that you see in the US.
[Guest 1]: I think it is the retrenchment of the workforce, which is not in the knowledge economy as production
[Guest 1]: goes out. And you know, JD Vance writes interesting things about why we are getting this problem
[Guest 1]: in the US because even mass shootouts are fairly recent phenomena in the US 80s 90s.
[Guest 1]: They had guns for hundreds of years, 1776 onwards, they have been owning guns, we didn't
[Guest 1]: have this problem, we have some deep cultural problems there. Similarly, what we have in
[Guest 1]: Japan probably, which leads to suicide. So we have to start thinking about that point
[Guest 1]: that yes, self harm is a problem with guns. There are a lot of ways to go out yourself
[Guest 1]: and there I agree. But that is still from a libertarian point of view. That's not a
[Guest 1]: good argument. Because if you will harm yourself, for that people who don't harm themselves
[Guest 1]: should not leak. One of the easiest ways carbon monoxide poisoning, just turn your exhaust,
[Amit Varma]: put a pipe in your exhaust and put it in your car.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, that's fair enough. And the one point where you've got me is a libertarian point
[Amit Varma]: of view where I do believe that if you have the right to life, you have the right to kill
[Amit Varma]: yourself. And I also believe that suicide is not necessarily a mental health problem.
[Amit Varma]: It can, under certain circumstances be quite rational to choose to go out. So I buy that
[Amit Varma]: part of it. And that's a separate argument entirely, really. But the consequentialist
[Amit Varma]: argument against guns would involve that suicide rates go up and however high the Japanese
[Amit Varma]: rate might be, we don't know the counterfactual or what it would have been if guns were more
[Amit Varma]: freely available. But we have and I'll come to this a little later when Sudhanshu also
[Amit Varma]: joins the discussion, perhaps that though I'm waiting for you to kind of let's squeeze
[Amit Varma]: this argument dry. But you know, the experience in Australia, for example, after they did
[Amit Varma]: their gun buyback, and they changed their gun laws, is that there are multiple studies
[Amit Varma]: we show which are which I'll cite, we showed that the rates of suicides drastically went
[Amit Varma]: down. Obviously, it's not a magic bullet, if I may use that phrase, but we'll come to
[Amit Varma]: that. I also wanted to address what you sort of said about, okay, here's what we can do
[Amit Varma]: with guns, you are not arguing they should be just sold over the counter, like random
[Amit Varma]: medicines, like an aspirin or something, but that they should be licensing. I have sort
[Amit Varma]: of two points to make. One is that we don't really have state capacity in India for anything.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're going to say that these are the check, like if I want to buy a gun, these
[Amit Varma]: are the checks and balances. Number one, there isn't that state capacity to make sure I jump
[Amit Varma]: through all those hoops. So the system will be perverted in some way, like for example,
[Amit Varma]: today, you can go to the RTO and get a driving license without actually taking the test.
[Amit Varma]: And I've seen that happen enough. And that's a failure of state capacity and failure of
[Amit Varma]: state capacity is essentially ubiquitous everywhere except when it comes to pure rent seeking
[Amit Varma]: when there is no lack of it. And the other issue there is that, especially with regard
[Amit Varma]: to India, when state capacity is low, we have seen that any system that can be gamed will
[Amit Varma]: be gamed. Right. So if you, for example, make it a requirement that okay, you have to get
[Amit Varma]: a psychiatrist certificate before we get to the gun. Come on, you know, there'll be the
[Amit Varma]: shop set up where an agent will get you a psychiatrist certificate and take 1000 bucks
[Amit Varma]: or whatever it is. And so that's that's one objection, the state capacity objection. And
[Amit Varma]: my second objection is also that look, I live in India. Okay. I mean, I've lived in India
[Amit Varma]: all my life, obviously, and I'm 45. And I've never felt the need to have a gun for purposes
[Amit Varma]: of self defense. Because any dicey situations that I have got myself in, I mean, I've never
[Amit Varma]: seen a gun really in civil life. There's never been like a shootout where I'm like, if I
[Amit Varma]: had a gun, I could intervene now. That's one that if you make guns freely available, you
[Amit Varma]: might create a situation where I might feel that need, but then you would be shifting
[Amit Varma]: from this equilibrium in India where nobody has guns to the sort of US equilibrium where
[Amit Varma]: because anybody can get a gun, you also feel the need to get a gun to defend yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And I am like, why move from this equilibrium to that one? These are sort of my two points
[Guest 1]: state capacity and the equilibrium. On the question of state capacity, I would argue
[Guest 1]: that lack of state capacity, if it is taken as a reason for accepting reduction of freedom,
[Guest 1]: then you have to argue that it is okay for Gurgaon police to issue an advisory that women
[Guest 1]: will not travel after eight o'clock, because Gurgaon police is under manned. And so they
[Guest 1]: are unable to work. So that is first issue that we get that then that is a slippery slope
[Guest 1]: on which you start losing a lot of things. Actually, what has happened is, because of
[Guest 1]: the ban, we haven't developed state capacity. So the ban then becomes justification for
[Guest 1]: not investing in state capacity. And I would say, if you give the people of a kind, if
[Guest 1]: the government had the choice, you can ban it, or you can regulate it, they'll always
[Guest 1]: choose ban, because then they don't have to build state capacity to do it. But because
[Guest 1]: of that lack of state capacity, we already have six crore unregistered guns. So I would
[Guest 1]: say that, because of that lack of state capacity, we have that problem. And I agree with you.
[Guest 1]: Yes, there were problems. But for example, recently, what Delhi RTO forces, the driving
[Guest 1]: instructor, one of the RTO officers to take a video of you driving. When I took the driving
[Guest 1]: test recently, they had to make me take a video. And so state capacity develops. Because
[Guest 1]: we could have said, okay, we'll ban driving, because we don't have state capacity for doing
[Guest 1]: that. And you could say that, yes, we'll do public transport, we'll do metro and practically
[Guest 1]: in Delhi, there's a very good argument to make or in Bombay that why do you need a driving
[Guest 1]: license in Bombay or Delhi. That brings me to the second point about the equilibrium.
[Guest 1]: I would argue that equilibrium you face is because of the places you choose to live in.
[Guest 1]: I choose to live in Delhi. It has got central armed police forces, it has got Delhi police,
[Guest 1]: the best police force in the country. It has got large amount of security cordons around
[Guest 1]: the system. So we live under that security umbrella. But what if you are a person who
[Guest 1]: stood for a panchayat election in Kashmir? What if you are a person who stood up against
[Guest 1]: the Naxals in Dante Vada? Okay, or you're just the local doctor who's being harassed
[Guest 1]: by goons, people who go out to the villages, people who go out to places where these 6.1
[Guest 1]: crore unregistered weapons are, they are not in the same equilibrium.
[Amit Varma]: In that case, the lack of state capacity supports your point, because you're saying that if
[Amit Varma]: the state cannot protect me from Naxals in the village where I live, at least give me
[Guest 1]: the right to protect myself.
[Guest 1]: And I would say also state is always an ex-post actor. That it comes after you have been shot,
[Guest 1]: it might do some justice and try to put the person in jail. If you believe in vengeance,
[Guest 1]: they can put that person to death penalty also, but that person is gone. And that is
[Guest 1]: taken, that is over for you. So I would always say that you should have a last line of defense.
[Guest 1]: And of course, that should be done reasonably, just like we have public transport in Delhi,
[Guest 1]: but I still want my car. And of course, again, I would argue that there are greater defense
[Guest 1]: requirements for different people. But it is not always very narrow that you must have
[Guest 1]: a threat, identified threat. For example, we allow, we have created a nice exception
[Guest 1]: for parliamentarians. Parliamentarians can buy guns the moment they become parliamentarians.
[Guest 1]: We don't adjust the threat of individual parliamentarians. But I would say why just parliamentarians?
[Guest 1]: I think if you're a parliamentarian from Bombay or Delhi, the risk is much lower than if you
[Guest 1]: just even stood for a Gram Panchayat election in Kashmir, or a headmaster in a school in
[Guest 1]: Dante Wada. So you're caught in the crossfire. It's your last line of defense. And you know,
[Guest 1]: 2008, the Bombay attack, it can happen in India, again and again, it was very successful.
[Guest 1]: I'm surprised. And I am thankful to the Indian state for probably preventing those things
[Guest 1]: from happening again and again. But 2008, I talked to somebody who said, this is a normal
[Guest 1]: thing in Kashmir, holding up militants in hotels and then killing because hotels are
[Guest 1]: a good target. Most people are not residents. It's a very common thing to do in Kashmir.
[Guest 1]: And you were in Bombay at the time that affected you personally?
[Guest 1]: No, I did not. I was not in Bombay, but I had worked with somebody who got killed in
[Guest 1]: that. And yes, that kind of changed my perception on this issue. And I started reading more.
[Guest 1]: And then I went from this nuanced position of from a simplistic position of ban and non
[Guest 1]: ban and allowed to a more nuanced graded position. So if you are one of those people, the other
[Guest 1]: thing I would say is also in this case is federalism. That you can make laws that okay,
[Guest 1]: you can't have guns here, you can have guns there. But those are also options to choose
[Guest 1]: for the US doesn't have a single gun law, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, okay. It's all the states.
[Guest 1]: States or even city specific cities can have ordinances. I think we should also think of
[Guest 1]: federalism on that way. But again, what the main judgment in the US which created all
[Guest 1]: this dispute was the Heller judgment, which people misquote. The Heller judgment required
[Guest 1]: residents of Washington DC if they owned a gun to either disassemble the gun or an unload
[Guest 1]: and disassemble the gun or keep the gun loaded and assembled with a lock physical lock and
[Guest 1]: key on the trigger to prevent it from being used. And the person who wanted was a retired
[Guest 1]: cop who had investigated mafia systems and he would have to keep a gun with a physical
[Guest 1]: lock on the thing and he said this extreme and the US Supreme Court position is that
[Guest 1]: you can't put so much restrictions on the right to bear arms that it becomes ineffective.
[Guest 1]: And think of it, the Washington didn't ban it. They put so many restrictions that it
[Guest 1]: became infeasible. And I think that is where we should start thinking about that. No, let's
[Guest 1]: not put so much restrictions that none of us can. And I would say also there is shooting
[Guest 1]: as a sport. Most of Indian top shooters people don't know this go to Germany to train or
[Guest 1]: to other countries. Bindra went to Germany to train. Why? It's impossible to import a
[Amit Varma]: gun in India. High quality guns cannot be imported. And also even trivial things like
[Amit Varma]: the import duties on bullets and all of that nonsense even for a sportsman like him. Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And things like that it made him cheaper to just go outside and practice and I think it
[Guest 1]: is good to have a amount of population who are trained in firearms. So there are two
[Amit Varma]: aspects to what you just said. One is there is a philosophical argument of we should have
[Amit Varma]: the right to defend ourselves. And you turn my point of state capacity against me by showing
[Amit Varma]: that I mean, we have privilege to be in Delhi and Bombay respectively. But if you are in
[Amit Varma]: a smaller part of India where there is effectively no rule of law, and you can't tell a citizen
[Amit Varma]: that the state won't defend you, but you can't defend yourself either. So that's your sort
[Amit Varma]: of philosophical argument if I stated correctly. And the practical argument, if one may say
[Amit Varma]: comes from the instance of the 2008 attacks, where you're saying that, listen, it is probable
[Amit Varma]: that if one of the victims or one of the people who was in that space had a gun, it is somewhat
[Amit Varma]: probable that the casualties could have been less because the likelihood of someone fighting
[Amit Varma]: back is nonzero. And therefore they could have or at least the guards had guns. Oh,
[Guest 1]: even the guard, even the guards don't have even private security in India can't get guns.
[Guest 1]: At the most one guy has a smooth barrel shotgun, which is legal and all that very difficult.
[Amit Varma]: Even private security guards can't have guns.
[Amit Varma]: So this is an argument that people in favor of gun rights make whenever there is a mass
[Amit Varma]: shooting that, you know, there were less people would have died if they were guns. So I'm
[Amit Varma]: curious that you obviously have to, I mean, there is a trade off here, you have to weigh
[Amit Varma]: the likelihood of the shooter being stopped before he kills so many people, with the likelihood
[Amit Varma]: of more people dying in a dispersed way, including from suicides or domestic quarrels or misfires,
[Amit Varma]: if a child gets it or whatever, you have to weigh those two. Are there statistics that
[Amit Varma]: you can use in your favor, leaving the philosophical argument aside, just looking at consequences?
[Amit Varma]: Are there statistics you can cite in your favor to show that there is a correlation
[Amit Varma]: between greater availability of guns and less gun violence?
[Guest 1]: No, difficult. The problem with the statistics in this is, as you pointed out, different
[Amit Varma]: cultural political systems.
[Amit Varma]: So the counterfactuals don't exist.
[Guest 1]: Yes, but I would argue that when people say guns are banned in most developed countries,
[Guest 1]: they are making a very simplistic comparison with the Indian system. And that is not true.
[Guest 1]: In many developed countries, you're allowed to buy guns for home defense. Sportsmen are
[Guest 1]: allowed to buy guns, you're allowed to hold guns for systems with different restrictions.
[Guest 1]: And I would say many of them are far more peaceful than India is. India's homicide rates
[Guest 1]: are pretty high. It's not that low as we would like to think it is. And that's my point on
[Guest 1]: this issue. If we were to be able to do this, you know, kind of a calculus and come to the
[Guest 1]: right point, then it doesn't work that way. It is a call you have to take. And there I
[Guest 1]: would argue where is the origin of our gun law. Our gun law starts in 1878. After the
[Guest 1]: mutiny, where the sole objective of the British rulers were to take away all the guns from
[Guest 1]: Indians because they didn't like what happened the last time Indians had guns. And that was
[Guest 1]: the philosophical basis for our gun law. People make these other arguments for that it is
[Amit Varma]: not.
[Amit Varma]: But the philosophical basis was an oppressive state wanting to keep its subjects in check.
[Guest 1]: Yes. And to that extent that they can't defend themselves at all. And this is an ideological
[Guest 1]: question to answer. And I would say yes, we can differ on this plateau. But we should
[Guest 1]: start thinking about it. If we were to do an Indian full ban, I would argue with you,
[Guest 1]: then put the state capacity to take out the 6.1 crore guns which are unregistered. And
[Guest 1]: what do you do with the guys who have registered guns? Manu Sharma shot somebody with a registered
[Guest 1]: gun. Interestingly, it was registered with his father who was an MP probably. That's
[Guest 1]: how he got a 22 caliber. And so the people who have registered guns, are we going to
[Guest 1]: do a full blanket ban? I'm okay with a full blanket ban. But then no guns with cops, no
[Guest 1]: exceptions to the ban by oh, you are in personal danger. So you can get a gun, go and get a
[Guest 1]: security guard, pay for a cop to guard you.
[Amit Varma]: But despite these statistics of how many guns we have and five for every hundred and so
[Amit Varma]: on, would you broadly agree or disagree with the contention I made at the start of the
[Amit Varma]: episode that we are in an equilibrium where nobody has guns, which seems broadly and again,
[Amit Varma]: I'm obviously biased by my privileged existence in Bombay, where I don't see guns around me
[Amit Varma]: at all and don't feel the need for one. And it's possible that in other parts of India,
[Unknown]: it's obviously not like that and guns are a part of everyday violence and people are
[Amit Varma]: defenseless against it. So is my contention about that equilibria false to begin with?
[Guest 1]: I would say it is true for certain parts of India, but not true for large parts of India.
[Guest 1]: If you go into the badlands of UP, Bihar, which is a border with Nepal, from where guns
[Guest 1]: can come from China, if you go to Kashmir, where Pakistan has pumped guns into the system,
[Guest 1]: if you go to Northeast, where again, the insurgencies have pumped guns from Myanmar, China, Bangladesh,
[Guest 1]: that is not true. And there, I mean, because we have a single Indian Arms Act, all over
[Guest 1]: the country, same law, that is you and I are beneficiaries of the equilibria here, but
[Guest 1]: that reality is not the reality which a lot of people face. And that is something we should
[Guest 1]: consider and point out and I'm okay for if you think of graded in terms of geography
[Guest 1]: also. You can't have guns here, you can't have guns there. There are some problems with
[Guest 1]: that also because people move freely. But it's not a reality of the system here. And
[Guest 1]: the other question about the murder rate question, more than the absolute number and this is
[Guest 1]: probably a very charged point, it's also important who gets killed. Okay, if murder rate goes
[Guest 1]: up, but a few more bad people are getting killed, people who are threatening other people
[Guest 1]: getting killed. Is that a horrible thing to be in?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if the data existed, I could consider that argument. But if it's a hypothetical
[Amit Varma]: that you're proposing, then it's, you know, I wouldn't even know how to, like, I came
[Amit Varma]: across some limited studies. And again, I haven't, to be very honest, I did the lazy
[Amit Varma]: thing of just googling online for arguments against gun rights. I found some studies cited.
[Amit Varma]: So I've just copy pasted the conclusions here. I haven't looked at the studies myself to
[Amit Varma]: see the methodology as I would do.
[Guest 1]: I've looked at one or two, there's another thing that happens. If you have relatively
[Guest 1]: freer ownership of guns, violent break-ins fall.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, because it might be the chance that the house owner has a gun and you could...
[Guest 1]: And this has been studied when looking at smaller communities in the US with freer gun
[Amit Varma]: rights and...
[Amit Varma]: This is interesting. So what you're saying is you're changing the incentives for criminals
[Amit Varma]: because they don't know who might fight back. And also you're changing the incentives for
[Amit Varma]: even terrorists for something like the 2008 attacks.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I would say terrorist is difficult. Like if you have committed to kill yourself,
[Guest 1]: you will do it, you will do it. And it will be only if somebody has a gun, they'll take
[Guest 1]: you down. And hopefully that is this outcome you get. But yes, there is a lot of petty
[Guest 1]: crime or petty violence that happens in India. I would call it petty because in the sense
[Guest 1]: that the person who's doing it is in larger numbers to the victim and is just, you know,
[Guest 1]: taking advantage of his size or numbers, lynchings, breaking-ins, things like that, where the
[Guest 1]: person is just knows the other person is weak. And there I think gun changes that dynamic.
[Guest 1]: And so you have to start looking at those numbers also. Let's say the murder rate goes
[Guest 1]: up a little bit. But violent break-ins go down to go down by a lot.
[Guest 1]: How do you calibrate that?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, and that is a trade off to also start thinking about.
[Amit Varma]: I'll cite some figures anyway. And I think when Sudhanshu comes in, he'll have counter
[Amit Varma]: figures to these. But so in 1983, there was a cross sectional studies of all 50 US states,
[Amit Varma]: which showed that the six states with the strictest gun laws, according to the NRA,
[Amit Varma]: had suicide rates that were approximately three out of 100,000 people lower than in
[Amit Varma]: other states. And at these states, suicide rates were four out of 100,000 people lower
[Amit Varma]: than those of the states with the least restrictive gun laws. This is one study. Then there's
[Amit Varma]: a 2011 study that found that firearm regulation laws in the US have, quote, a significant
[Amit Varma]: deterrent effect on male suicide, stop quote. A 2014 study found in the US found that children
[Amit Varma]: living in states with stricter gun laws were safer, stop quote. And I don't know how they
[Amit Varma]: define this or find that out. I'm just sort of quoting what I found. Now in Australia,
[Amit Varma]: interestingly, where they changed the gun laws, and they bought back a lot of firearms
[Amit Varma]: and so on. 2004 study found that in the context of these laws, overall firearm related deaths,
[Amit Varma]: especially suicides declined dramatically. I haven't seen the study. I don't know what
[Guest 1]: they mean. But the interesting part in this is the firearm related death. Okay. Murder
[Guest 1]: rate, how much did it fall? is an interesting question. So London is now the knife injury
[Guest 1]: capital of the world. It is an interesting part to that. That's an interesting title
[Amit Varma]: for a city also we are the knife injury capital. Okay, and another 2006 study in Australia
[Amit Varma]: found that after the law was enacted in 1996 by Australia, the country went more than a
[Amit Varma]: decade without any mass shootings, and gun related deaths, especially suicides declined
[Amit Varma]: dramatically. But as you've pointed out, you shouldn't look at gun related deaths, you
[Amit Varma]: should look at the overall death rate. So what I'm going to ask you to do Shubha before
[Amit Varma]: we bring Sudhanshu in to argue with both of us and convince us that we are wrong, is I
[Amit Varma]: want to make sure that I've given you a chance to sum up your position as completely as possible,
[Amit Varma]: and not kind of leave anything out. So I'll ask you to like, if there's a further argument
[Amit Varma]: you'd like to add, please do that. And state your position for me once that I mean, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: we can't use the term ban now, because that's too simplistic, as you pointed out. How do
[Amit Varma]: you think gun availability in India should be regulated and managed? What's your whole
[Guest 1]: view on this? I would say we have to go from that spectrum, that you can't give a knife
[Guest 1]: to a child. And you can't say that, no, the Indian Army cannot own bomb Zookas. And in
[Guest 1]: that spectrum, we have to start thinking about it. What bans also do is make us intellectually
[Guest 1]: lazy, we don't think about it. So when you start having, I would say that my position
[Guest 1]: is we should have a graded approach. And of course, depending on situations, we should
[Guest 1]: allow people to own guns, the Indian law does it, but it gives too much discretion on the
[Guest 1]: part of the officer who gives that system, we should have a system by which you can challenge
[Guest 1]: it or show some systems and we don't have checks and balances on it. So once your threat
[Guest 1]: to life is established, you can get a gun without training, without safety checks, without
[Guest 1]: any ability to whether you store the gun properly or not. And we need to move from that and
[Guest 1]: say that you have to do all these other steps. And then we will get into situations where
[Guest 1]: we start dealing with guns as a system. So for example, I would like to add something.
[Guest 1]: When we have celebratory firings in India, you have to charge the people under nuisance,
[Guest 1]: because we have created this myth that India guns are banned, we don't have a crime of
[Guest 1]: illegal discharge of a firearm, or a dangerous discharge of a firearm. While Manushama went
[Guest 1]: to jail, his dad did not go to jail or anything because the gun, there is no crime for handing
[Guest 1]: your gun to the son. Because we presume that it's banned. So therefore, it is not a crime
[Guest 1]: for a registered user to hand his gun to the son or even leave it in a place where his
[Amit Varma]: son can access it easily.
[Amit Varma]: So not only do we pretend it's banned, you're saying the Indian state is in a state of denial
[Amit Varma]: about the gun ownership that is already there. And therefore, we can't have effective law.
[Guest 1]: And therefore, when things really go bad, we are unable to then deal with it. Can you
[Guest 1]: sue him under Arms Act? No. And that is some of those issues. So you should do, for example,
[Guest 1]: bullet control. How many bullets do you have? If you fired a bullet, give me the casing,
[Guest 1]: show me where you fired it. You have to do all of that. And then you can arrest and prosecute
[Guest 1]: a lot of people for violating those even if you might not have the full evidence of murder.
[Guest 1]: At the end, Manushama was convicted because spent cartridges were found in his car, which
[Guest 1]: matched the bullet that was shot through Jessica.
[Amit Varma]: And your argument is that in the kind of regulated environment you envisage, that would always
[Amit Varma]: be there, you would be able to trace every gun and every bullet back to the owner, they
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't be the black market, whatever exists of it. And therefore, you know, you'd have
[Amit Varma]: a very good handle on things.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, UK does it very simple, you get a gun, they shoot a sample one and they keep the
[Guest 1]: ballistic marks. This will be expensive. I'm not saying this alone, we'll have to build
[Guest 1]: state capacity to do it. But we can't live in the denial of that system. And you know,
[Guest 1]: if he had that, the Manushama case wouldn't have had, he almost got away with it. He got
[Guest 1]: acquitted by the trial court, because he could not recover the gun. But if he had the bullet
[Guest 1]: and that bullet matched his gun, or matched his father's gun, I think there should be
[Guest 1]: some at least some presumption which would lead to some at least lesser, but you go for
[Guest 1]: seven years, eight years of conviction, you hand over gun to your child, you go for some
[Guest 1]: time of conviction, you do celebratory firings, you go to, so we have to do graded and once
[Guest 1]: we do graded, we'll get into a lot of trouble. But those trouble will then clear up all these
[Guest 1]: obligations and processes where sometimes the Indian law gets into a vacuum. What do
[Guest 1]: we do with this fact about gun ownership and systems we have this denial of we are living
[Guest 1]: the ban is officially on paper. But there are six floor guns on the market and we have
[Guest 1]: to just deal with the problem and first level of dealing is let's accept it and let's make
[Amit Varma]: reasonable laws around it.
[Amit Varma]: That's an excellent argument and you've given me a lot to think about. But we are going
[Amit Varma]: to have a lot more to think about after a quick commercial break when we are joined
[Amit Varma]: by Sudhanshu Nima, who thinks both me and Shubho are wrong.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another amazing week on the IBM podcast network. If you're
[Unknown]: not following us on social media, you know what I'm tired of asking you to follow us
[Unknown]: this time I expect you to follow us please make sure you follow us if you're not following
[Unknown]: us I'm not going to talk to you anymore. Seriously, I'm sure many of you would like that. But
[Unknown]: that's the only threat I have. We'd also like to thank our sponsors on the network this
[Unknown]: week. Thank you Storytel. Thank you Intel. We're really grateful for your support. This
[Unknown]: week on Cyrus' Cyrus is joined by Prakash Malia. Prakash is the managing director for
[Unknown]: Intel India sales and marketing group. Prakash and Cyrus get into talking about Prakash's
[Unknown]: travel habits and also talking a little bit about Prakash's hobby of photography. So really
[Unknown]: fun conversation. Do check it out. On Agla Station Adulthood host Ayushi and Ritasha
[Unknown]: talk about confidence and self esteem and how it's different from self awareness. On
[Unknown]: the Boundless podcast Natasha shares the problem of being a brown immigrant in a foreign land
[Unknown]: and how to cope with it. She also recites a poem on being average and calls it a new
[Unknown]: voice. This week on Gaby City Farhad and Sunetru take us through the deep understanding of
[Unknown]: being intimate with other people and recreating those spaces. On States of Anarchy Hamsini
[Unknown]: is joined by Amaya Nayak to discuss international law and how it measures up in current geopolitics.
[Unknown]: On Football Shootball host Gaurav, Kartik and Siva talk about Jose Mourinho's shock
[Unknown]: appointment as the Spurs coach. And of course the big game last Saturday Man City versus
[Unknown]: Chelsea. On The Habit coach Ashnan talks about voting and acknowledging the choices that
[Unknown]: we make with a mindful approach. On Pragati Podcast we have repeat guest Amaya Nayak who
[Unknown]: talks to Pawan about refugees, distress, migrants and movement of people across the world. On
[Unknown]: Ganatantra this week Alok and Surya are joined by Dr. Srinath Raghavan to discuss politics
[Unknown]: of the armed forces, nationalism, the impact of social media on perceptions of the army
[Unknown]: and more. On Storytellers and Storytellers Vineet is joined by actress and storyteller
[Unknown]: Asha Channa and also VP Content and Strategies at One Digital Entertainment Sudeep Lahiri.
[Unknown]: Together they talk about the influencer ecosystem and discuss strategies that can help brands
[Unknown]: collaborate with influencers better. On The Geekful Podcast, Dinkar and Tejas talk about
[Unknown]: all the notable dragons that we have watched in movies and TV shows throughout the years.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Shubho Roy and Sudhanshu Nima
[Amit Varma]: about gun rights. I started this episode by making my argument on why guns should not
[Amit Varma]: be sold openly over the counter in India. Shubho did not agree with me and made a powerful
[Amit Varma]: argument about why no gun should be sold in India, but with certain restrictions and licensing
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And now I'll invite my third guest on to the show. Sudhanshu,
[Amit Varma]: welcome to the show.
[Guest 2]: Thank you, Amit. All right. So let me begin with stating my position and then we can go
[Guest 2]: forward from there. So my position is anyone above 18, adult, competent, mentally competent,
[Guest 2]: that is, should be allowed to have a gun without any restrictions or licensing. Okay. And my
[Guest 2]: argument, barring everything which has been discussed, my argument specifically is against
[Guest 2]: the state that I have a right to defend myself against the state. So I'm arguing for the
[Guest 2]: hundred million victims of communism who were killed in China and Russia and Cambodia and
[Guest 2]: many other countries, the North Koreans, even the Jews in Germany first were disarmed by
[Guest 2]: Hitler and then were killed. So my argument is for those people. And I'm very specific
[Guest 2]: about deontology. I am not going to enter into a consequentialist debate because I think
[Guest 2]: that's a very wrong mechanism to analyze an issue like rights. And as you deal with the
[Guest 2]: question of impulse, that you could commit suicide on impulse with a gun, that is all
[Guest 2]: well and good. But why should my right be curtailed because of your impulse? Right.
[Guest 2]: And on the question of bombs, I say let everyone have them because once the state comes for
[Guest 2]: you and you're armless, defenseless, there's nothing for you. The state can starve you
[Guest 2]: to death as we have seen in the Chinese regimes. They can kill you with guns like we have seen
[Guest 2]: Hitler do. They have gulags, special prisons for you. They can do anything to you. And
[Guest 2]: what will you defend yourself with? Sticks?
[Amit Varma]: So I'll unpack the points you made for the benefit of my listeners, especially deontology
[Amit Varma]: and consequentialism. And basically, you can make two kinds of moral arguments I'm simplifying
[Amit Varma]: massively. But one is you can come from first principles and say that these are my first
[Amit Varma]: principles and my entire moral view of the world flows from those. And the other is that
[Amit Varma]: I don't really have any first principles, except that we should do the greatest good
[Amit Varma]: of the greatest number or whatever, or we should look at spreading welfare. So we should
[Amit Varma]: look at the consequences of things. So for example, a consequentialist looking at gun
[Amit Varma]: rights would then try to gather data and figure out what kills more people or less people
[Amit Varma]: and whether banning guns helps or it doesn't. And of course, as Shobha pointed out, the
[Amit Varma]: data is very muddy, it can be misinterpreted in different ways. And this is this does become
[Amit Varma]: a problem with social science that because you don't know the counterfactuals, you can't
[Amit Varma]: do testing under controlled circumstances. What inevitably happens is that every ideological
[Amit Varma]: party will find some data that appears to support its position. So even in terms of
[Amit Varma]: consequentialism, even if you were to say that, I believe in that is really difficult
[Amit Varma]: to come to a conclusion if you're willing to reasonably consider both sides of the argument.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're saying is I don't care about consequentialism. What you are coming from
[Amit Varma]: first principles and your first principles are based on the individual's right to self
[Amit Varma]: autonomy and to defend herself from the state.
[Guest 2]: Yes. And also, we can go into the question of how guns are regulated currently, as Shobha
[Guest 2]: pointed out, my concern with licensing or any form of registration with the state is
[Guest 2]: that once the state decides like on one hand, you are saying that this person running the
[Guest 2]: country is a dictator. On the other hand, you are saying that you should not have guns
[Guest 2]: without permission of the state. So in case of let's say, Indira Gandhi during emergency,
[Guest 2]: all those people who are forced to civilize should not they have guns? How would they
[Guest 2]: defend themselves once the state comes for you? And if they know you have a gun, be it
[Guest 2]: by registration or licensing, they will have your addresses, they will link it to Aadhaar,
[Guest 2]: you know, and they will come for you first. So disarm you first, then go for the rest
[Guest 2]: of the population. So that is one set of arguments. Second, guns also defend people who don't
[Guest 2]: have guns. So for example, it increases the cost to criminals. So if a rapist in Delhi
[Guest 2]: is looking for a new victim, the cost goes up because they don't know whether this person
[Guest 2]: may or may not have a gun. So the incidence reduces similar to what happens with invention
[Guest 2]: of car alarms, even cars which don't have alarm, the theft goes down. It just does because
[Guest 2]: criminals have to consider the possibility that this car might be alarmed. Right. So
[Guest 2]: that is one thing. And second, we have seen so for example, in US, Chicago tends to have
[Guest 2]: the most regulations on guns. And it's also the city with highest numbers of homicides
[Guest 2]: in the US. Whereas if you look at other parts of us where guns are open carry, mass shootings
[Guest 2]: are much less homicide rates are down. So even from a consequentialist point of view,
[Guest 2]: we can discuss
[Amit Varma]: But you know, here, I would say that the causation can also go the other way. For example, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Chicago might have more laws restricting guns because they have a greater problem with
[Amit Varma]: crime to begin with. And if the Shubhukt come in, please.
[Guest 1]: So it's very interesting. I've been reading the Illinois gun control laws. And it makes
[Guest 1]: a very interesting point about Chicago. In Chicago, you can keep a gun with yourself,
[Guest 1]: you can keep a gun in your car. You can't get up on the public transport with a gun.
[Guest 1]: You can't enter an office or a public building with a gun. Now, what it plays out is very
[Guest 1]: interesting. Let's say you have a nine to five job, you take the metro to the job, and
[Guest 1]: then you come back and you walk a little bit from the metro station. Can you carry a gun?
[Guest 1]: No, because you'll have to get on the metro, which is illegal to carry a gun. You have
[Guest 1]: to get into the office, which is again illegal. Now, if you are the gangbanger, and you're
[Guest 1]: just standing outside your street corner entire day, you don't have a job. You are trying
[Guest 1]: to say sell drugs. Can you carry a gun? Yes. Because you're not going to get up on the
[Guest 1]: metro where there's a metal detector, you're not going to get into office which has a metal
[Guest 1]: detector. Again, at those points, you will be prosecuted for violating Chicago laws on
[Guest 1]: guns. And therefore, you have created this perverse system where citizens with nine to
[Guest 1]: five jobs with normal people, no guns. Criminals are people who don't have a job or a life,
[Guest 1]: which is productive, who are just hanging around selling drugs or doing other activities
[Guest 1]: or unemployed, they can have guns. That is the twisted things we create when you have
[Guest 1]: these strict gun laws. And again, therefore, I was also pointing out, if you have different
[Guest 1]: gun laws across this country, we have to start thinking of some common minimum ones. Because
[Guest 1]: otherwise you will create these incentives. And these incentives play out very easily.
[Guest 1]: We think, oh, we have banned guns on metros. Therefore, we have made metro safe. Yes, you
[Guest 1]: have made metro safe. But you have made the walk from the metro to the home very unsafe.
[Guest 1]: And this there's no this one to one correlation between the law and the outcome you will get.
[Guest 1]: You will get weird outcomes because people are game theory animals. And it creates these
[Guest 1]: weird situations. So Chicago is a very interesting situation. If you read the law, you realize,
[Guest 1]: oh, oh my god, if you're a complying citizen, and you have to really have a normal life,
[Guest 1]: you can't carry a gun.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point. So now, both of you actually don't agree on this because Shubho
[Amit Varma]: says that there should be like your view, therefore, it would be that if the citizen
[Amit Varma]: needs correctly from monks, as I'm sure if I'm stating this, not quite accurately, but
[Amit Varma]: what I understand of your view is that look, the citizen has a right to defend himself
[Amit Varma]: from the state, as well as others. And therefore, it is perverse for the state to control the
[Guest 2]: means of this defense by having licensing and so on.
[Guest 2]: Yes, that would be one of my argument. Also, I would like to point out on the question
[Guest 2]: of statistics. So when we were discussing a statistic earlier, it's very easy to get
[Guest 2]: statistics on how many mass shootings and how many people are killed. But what is statistics
[Guest 2]: you can't get on how many people were saved because of guns. So let's say a person comes
[Guest 2]: to me with the intention of robbing me, I pull out my gun. Now I'm not going and that
[Guest 2]: person runs away. I'm not going to go to the police and report this crime. It's not even
[Guest 2]: a crime because it didn't happen to begin with. Now, how many people are defended like
[Guest 2]: that every day? We don't know. And that hypothetical, we have instances where sometimes this mass
[Guest 2]: shooters are shot by a person who had a gun legally. But we cannot get that statistics
[Guest 2]: on how many people were saved. Millions and millions of them every day. And if you're
[Guest 2]: in a country like in Latin America and Brazil and Chile or Honduras, you have to have a
[Guest 2]: gun because otherwise the state has no capacity to defend you. Same in India. If I'm being
[Guest 2]: robbed, the government is not going to defend me. As our friend points out, a gun in hand
[Guest 2]: is much better than a cop on the phone. So yeah, but yeah, that is correct position that
[Guest 2]: I want individuals to be able to defend themselves against the state, regardless of time and
[Guest 2]: place and whatever. And I do not see any reason why that kind of restriction should agree,
[Guest 2]: especially given the evidence that in the 19th century alone, we have 100 million people
[Amit Varma]: killed by the state.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fair point. But you know, I get the point about we don't know the counterfactuals
[Amit Varma]: of you know, if you defended yourself against a robbery and the guy ran away, we don't know
[Amit Varma]: the good that the possession of guns did. But what we do know is that we can look at
[Amit Varma]: a few cases, for example, you can look at Australia, which changed his gun laws and
[Amit Varma]: you can look at the crime rates before and after that. And obviously, the the rates that
[Amit Varma]: I just quoted were only of gun related deaths, not deaths overall. So it's not the full picture.
[Amit Varma]: But but one can look at data like that and come to some understanding maybe the US states
[Amit Varma]: which have different laws are a kind of sort of natural experiment by itself. Is that so
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so home breaking rates go down. Yeah, that's NRS favorite one. But yeah, it's a
[Guest 1]: tough statistic to counter. Yeah. And it's also a much more personal point. Like if you
[Guest 1]: break into my home, that is a violation, which is far more, you know, stronger as a violation
[Guest 1]: that that you know, if you if you have returned to a home that has been broken in, it is such
[Guest 1]: a shock. So it is I have not been victims of crime that much, but one small theft at
[Guest 1]: my home for a little because the door was left unlocked by mistake, but it was such
[Guest 1]: a shock. They took away some like broken microwave, which was not working. No monetary loss, but
[Guest 1]: it was such a shock. You get this thing that this is my home, my castle, violated, violated.
[Guest 1]: And that is a situation which goes down a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll come back to you for a moment, Shubham, because I want to sort of understand your
[Amit Varma]: argument bit better. So Langshu's argument, in a sense is simple to understand, because
[Amit Varma]: he's saying, I don't care about the consequences. I just care about first principles. And these
[Amit Varma]: are my first principles. And so I'm saying that individuals should have the right to
[Amit Varma]: protect yourself. Now, while you agree that it is hard to take a consequentialist position
[Amit Varma]: on this, because the data is quite muddy, and all of that, at the same time, you're
[Amit Varma]: not quite coming from first principles, because you are arguing that the state should have
[Amit Varma]: gradations of licensing and all of this. So, you know,
[Guest 1]: My point is that even when I come from first principles, you shouldn't, I come from first
[Guest 1]: principles, not first principle. And I would say liberty is one of the principles. But
[Guest 1]: there is also that we live in a society, we will have to manage our differences in society,
[Guest 1]: we have to create disincentives to use violence as the first resort, or extreme violence as
[Guest 1]: the bomb Zuka case in the first resort. So we'll have to come across these are two contradictory
[Guest 1]: principles that I want maximum liberty. But I also don't want to, you know, live on a
[Guest 1]: hill, 20 kilometers away, depending on the range of your bombs, look away from everybody
[Guest 1]: else. That is not a good life. I love urban living. I love the fact that we can drop into
[Guest 1]: a meeting and all of that and the bomb Zuka kind of makes it impossible if there's freely
[Guest 1]: owned bomb Zuka because somebody having a bad day, as you pointed out, there are suicides,
[Guest 1]: somebody having a bad day may decide not only will I go, I'll go with everybody around me.
[Guest 1]: That is a very dangerous situation where I go. So I think that is where my principle
[Guest 1]: is. But Sudhanshu's point about the state going crazy, there I would say that even if
[Guest 1]: you have registration, if there are substantial number of guns, taking it away is difficult.
[Guest 1]: Today, for example, it is very easy to take away guns, the registered guns, because 97
[Guest 1]: percent of the people have guns, it is okay to take away. But it is infeasible for the
[Guest 1]: government, for example, to take away all the cars in Delhi also. Where will you store
[Guest 1]: the cars? There's so many cars. So I think if you have reached a level of ownership,
[Guest 1]: which is quite high, then even if the government knows that these people have guns, you still
[Guest 1]: have to come and take it away from me. And that becomes difficult. And I think once that
[Guest 1]: has become a large enough population, I think what went wrong in Germany, in China, in Russia,
[Guest 1]: also, I would say was not enough people had guns. So the few that had guns, the state
[Guest 1]: had enough capacity to take it away. I would say, if a lot of people have simple weapons,
[Guest 1]: and I don't think weapons of mass destruction or things like that, because you can't use
[Guest 1]: them in an urban setting anyway. So state also can't use it in an urban setting without
[Guest 1]: setting of civil war and all of that, then it's okay, because still some cop has to come
[Guest 1]: up and knock and say, I want to take away your gun. And then if they are doing to every
[Guest 1]: household to your neighbour to you, then the question is, why? How are you doing it? And
[Guest 1]: then it breaks out in the open. But if there are only one in 100 people or two in 100 people
[Guest 1]: who have guns, that is the number that's possible because what is happening cop has come to
[Guest 1]: somebody's house, but if you have to take away everybody's gun, then it becomes a higher
[Guest 1]: barrier to that question of you know, state going awry and going bad. But by that time,
[Guest 1]: I would say by the time things have rolled to that level, where state is now going to
[Guest 1]: put people into concentration camps. Guns are not the only defence against it. I think
[Guest 1]: establishing rule of law, establishing democracy, those are hard work. And I think in some ways,
[Guest 1]: I fear that we might become lazy about that then. Because we have guns, we don't take
[Guest 1]: interest in the state. Okay, that is a counterfactual, I would think or hypothetical, we have to
[Guest 1]: think about it, we have to, the price of liberty is eternal vigilance. So we'd have to be vigilant
[Guest 1]: at all levels. So whenever a gun legislation is issued, or any other legislation is issued,
[Guest 1]: like the debate that we had about the terrorism law, or any of these other laws, those are
[Guest 1]: the things we should work towards to keep the state in check. By the time you have left
[Guest 1]: it to the level that Hitler is, things are doing or by the time Pol Pot has come, things
[Guest 1]: have gone too far. And I think there, the United Nations system is a little better.
[Guest 1]: We have now a system of crime of genocide where other countries come and intervene.
[Guest 1]: Though defective, I think it was not there in the First World War, it was after First
[Guest 1]: World War, it was not there. Because after Second World War, we realized the problem
[Guest 1]: and there is some level of pressure not to do that from the states and other states have
[Guest 1]: to come together to prevent one state from going really rogue on its citizens. But yes,
[Guest 1]: so I think two counters to that one is let's have enough guns so that it becomes infeasible
[Guest 1]: for a state to collect back all of them. But yes, if you kill somebody, I should be able
[Guest 1]: to trace where it came from. I don't want to live in a world where the state can raise
[Guest 1]: up its arms and say, I don't know who killed it. Just like if a car hits and I have the
[Guest 1]: number plate and you can't find the number, the owner of the car. That is not a level
[Guest 1]: of freedom I want to give because I'm balancing multiple values and multiple first principles.
[Amit Varma]: So Sudhanshu, I have a critical question of my own. But first, I'd like you to respond
[Amit Varma]: to Shubho's implication that you are giving undue primacy to one first principle, that
[Amit Varma]: of liberty, and not considering the other things that we should value and balance that
[Amit Varma]: against.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so, yes, I personally give most amount of value to first principles, that is liberty.
[Guest 2]: Second on the question of large enough number of guns. I would like to point out the Japanese
[Guest 2]: were interned in US and they had a large enough number of guns and had the right for hundreds
[Guest 2]: of years at that point in time. Plus, the question of that state will go gradually from
[Guest 2]: one point to another. I don't think that that is how it works. Indira Gandhi, the judgment
[Guest 2]: was announced against her at maybe in the afternoon, two, three o'clock. By midnight,
[Guest 2]: we had emergency on that day. And we live under the same constitution. We live under
[Guest 2]: the same government. And we never know. I mean, as recently, government has said 28,000
[Guest 2]: troops plus in Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: We're recording this on August 5, but the episode will be released much later. But we're
[Guest 2]: recording this on August 5, just for context.
[Guest 2]: So you never know how much a state will, a state will never go gradually that you know,
[Guest 2]: we are going to come for you. And we know this many of you have guns, and we'll send
[Guest 2]: this many people to that is not how it's going to happen. It is going to happen in a moment,
[Guest 2]: in a friction of a second, somebody like Indira Gandhi will rise up and say the country is
[Guest 2]: now under emergency, your fundamental rights are suspended. Your right to life also does
[Guest 2]: not exist to begin with. And we have instances where Supreme Court has gone on to the extent
[Guest 2]: of saying that yes, when you are killed under emergency, you have no right to life at all.
[Guest 2]: And you have no remedy whatsoever. Now that situation is somewhat corrected. But that
[Guest 2]: is not if the government has large enough majority, as the present government has, or
[Guest 2]: any future government may have, everything is possible in this country and any other
[Guest 2]: country whatsoever.
[Guest 2]: So just thinking that if people had large enough number of guns, and we have instances
[Guest 2]: in US where the military has fought civilians on US soil with large enough number of guns
[Guest 2]: and killed maybe 2000 of them. We have had multiple such instances, not just one or two.
[Guest 2]: So in, I think in the 70s, militia formed to 3000 people in Midwestern US and they were
[Guest 2]: trying to run a campaign against the federal government in US. The US government just sent
[Guest 2]: army military to deal with them. And they of course had higher grade weapons. Thousands
[Guest 2]: were killed. And that effectively nullifies the argument that once a large enough number
[Guest 2]: of people have guns, that is not how it's going to work because the state will always
[Guest 2]: have more capacity than an individual, especially when it comes to violence.
[Guest 2]: So in which case, why bother at all?
[Guest 2]: Exactly. That's what I'm saying.
[Guest 1]: So I think there again, if everyone has guns, then the paranoia of the state may also lead
[Guest 1]: to disorder. That let's say everybody has bomb zookas. I have a fear that 28,000 troops
[Guest 1]: have been sent to Kashmir and everybody in Kashmir explores their bomb zookas. End game
[Guest 1]: for everybody. The problem with that level of mass destruction is that you create these
[Guest 1]: end game situations where you can't walk back from or deescalate from because of that level
[Guest 1]: of weapons of mass destruction being available in citizens hand because today, any nuclear
[Guest 1]: weapon or something goes through multiple filter before somebody even to that extent,
[Guest 1]: again, countering my own point. Yes, there are weapons of mass destruction in the hands
[Guest 1]: of individual citizens in the army. But they have been trained, there's a protocol, there's
[Guest 1]: a way to launch them. That gives a lot of time to think about launching weapons of mass
[Guest 1]: destruction. So I think that is how weapons of mass destruction should be used. They should
[Guest 1]: be used as deterrent and there should be protocols and systems. If it is in the hands of citizens,
[Guest 1]: sadly, that structure collapses that. So I might panic one day, I might think the world
[Guest 1]: is coming to an end, which happens a lot of times people start thinking you get cults
[Guest 1]: who commit mass suicide. Now if they get bomb zookas, they want to take the entire town
[Guest 1]: or city with them. That is a problem. So that is the extent I would go. But on the point
[Guest 1]: of Indira Gandhi, I think there was science. I think if you read history back, she started
[Guest 1]: encroaching rights from the 60s. You know, 69 she nationalized banks, she did a lot of
[Guest 1]: nationalizations. She was doing extreme taxation. I mean, looking back, was 77 that big a surprise?
[Amit Varma]: I don't think so. I mean, hit level.
[Amit Varma]: 75 rather, but that's kind of that's also the hindsight bias kicking in. Yes, I think
[Amit Varma]: we also have to believe contemporary accounts where there are enough people who, you know,
[Amit Varma]: would have seen the science but was still taken by surprise. And also the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: every state is by its nature looking to consolidate power and oppressive to some extent or the
[Amit Varma]: other. So if you want to look for science, you will always find science.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. And then if you are fully armed, then any sign can be a trigger for you to correct.
[Guest 2]: That is amazing. That is amazing. That's how we keep government in check. That's the situation
[Guest 2]: when they would think twice before infringing on even the smallest shred of your liberty.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fair enough. But I am still worried by the fact that any random guy can take a
[Amit Varma]: bomb Zuka and decide Kima subco legage on and precedent thousands of people die.
[Guest 2]: 18 men, I'm sorry, a boy 18 mentally competent, as I said at the very beginning.
[Guest 2]: Oh, but that's not a guarantee. That's it.
[Guest 1]: There's no guarantee in life. No, but I would say no, but that was not in, you know, was
[Guest 1]: not crazy. Hmm. And let's see, you were angry, you killed your wife. Now the cops are coming
[Guest 1]: and you have a bomb Zuka. You're above 18. You are mentally competent. You're going to
[Amit Varma]: press that button because you're going down anyway. Right? Yeah. So you'll be like, whatever,
[Guest 2]: dude, and press the thing. But that would be a very drastic action to take. And I'm
[Guest 2]: very sure all humans are, there may be some psychopathic, but all it takes is one, right?
[Amit Varma]: Of course, but you're saying you don't care about possibility. You cannot infringe on
[Guest 2]: my rights. That is my point that just because you have impulses doesn't mean the state can
[Amit Varma]: take away my rights. Fair enough. Don't look at me like that. I have no impulses. I am
[Amit Varma]: a gentle soul. So let me ask you the question that I was kind of saving for you. And this
[Amit Varma]: is again, something that I'm thinking through and chewing because you know, I can come up
[Amit Varma]: with objections to it myself. And it's just a tough question, which is this, that yes,
[Amit Varma]: we have a right to defend ourselves. However, in our conception, the classical liberal conception,
[Amit Varma]: which at least you and I share, the whole purpose of the state is to defend those rights.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, for that reason, we give it a monopoly on violence and give it the license
[Amit Varma]: to do whatever it takes to defend those rights. Now, if in the interest of maintaining law
[Amit Varma]: and order, and what I'm now going to say has to be taken with a lot of caveats, because
[Amit Varma]: immediately slippery slopes form. But if then the state says that my job is to solely look
[Amit Varma]: after the rights of my citizens, which no state ever will, the state basically wants
[Amit Varma]: to rule you. But if a state is to say that my job is to solely look after the rights
[Amit Varma]: of its citizens, and the hypothetical possession of bomb Zuccas in the general population could
[Amit Varma]: endanger many of these lives, which I am supposed to be saving, then I should preemptively act
[Amit Varma]: to protect the citizens I am supposed to protect and therefore I should bomb the banzooka.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, I know that this kind of preemptive rationale that I'm doing it for your own protection
[Amit Varma]: can be and would be misused by the state. But leaving that aside, do you think there
[Guest 2]: is some merit to it at all? There is I can see some merit, but then again, the question
[Guest 2]: of where do you draw the line? Right, right. So UK, for example, as Shubham pointed out,
[Guest 2]: Ratan has become the knife capital of the world. In 1953, in UK, they passed a law banning
[Guest 2]: canning of knives in public which are longer than three inches. And it still goes on. So
[Guest 2]: my problem is okay, fine, you want to ban it, ban it. There will be criminals who will
[Guest 2]: obtain access to it anyway. Like, okay, it was illegal for North Korea to obtain nuclear
[Amit Varma]: weapons or for Iran. They got it anyway. But should the state then have the right to act
[Amit Varma]: preemptively to carry out its primary job of safeguarding the rights of its citizens?
[Amit Varma]: And if a line has to be drawn, so it doesn't become a slippery slope? Where would that
[Guest 2]: line be drawn? Like, what would the parameters be? That is my question. I don't want to draw
[Guest 2]: any lines. But since you two are in favor of drawing lines, that answer should lie with
[Guest 2]: you. That being said, I don't think that there is any legal mechanism you can envisage, which
[Guest 2]: would ban criminals from owning guns. So you can have all possible mechanism as Shubham
[Guest 2]: pointed out, we have 7 crore, 6 crore guns, and 97 lakhs are only legal. So you have this
[Guest 2]: 5-6 crore guns, which are illegal, which are just floating around in India. And I as a
[Guest 2]: law abiding citizen, am defenseless. And you have been very lucky that you have never faced
[Guest 2]: that situation. I've been robbed on knife point in Pune.
[Guest 2]: In Pune?
[Guest 2]: Yes. And in Delhi, I feel very unsafe. Actually, some of my friends carry knives with them.
[Amit Varma]: You know.
[Amit Varma]: I know one of them. Yes. And otherwise completely sturdy, reliable citizen. But I feel safe
[Guest 2]: with him. Exactly. In Delhi, I don't feel safe. I just don't. And Paharganj, I'm not
[Guest 2]: going to roam around after 11 o'clock because I'm not, I'm defenseless. And I know the state
[Amit Varma]: is not going to defend me at all.
[Amit Varma]: And that's you. It's far worse for women.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, exactly. And I wish every woman in Delhi has a gun.
[Guest 1]: That brings to the other point. You can't go to the assistant of people being beaten
[Guest 1]: up also in Delhi streets.
[Amit Varma]: Because you have nothing. You'll just get beaten up.
[Guest 2]: You might be added to the list of people.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, and they will have guns.
[Guest 1]: Or they may not have guns also. But you can't just draw a gun and say, people, let's calm
[Guest 1]: down. Let the cops come and solve this out. Because you can't even say that much. When
[Guest 1]: somebody is beating people, somebody is becoming a fight. And I think that is a thing which
[Guest 1]: is, for example, that to pass a law to give legal immunity to people who pick up strangers
[Guest 1]: on the road who have been victims of roadside assistance, because you would get harassed
[Amit Varma]: by the cops when you brought somebody to the hospital.
[Amit Varma]: The incentives are horrible. And many people still don't know that the law has changed.
[Guest 1]: So they're still hesitant to help others.
[Guest 1]: Even the cops don't know the law has changed. The cops will continue to harass you. So that
[Guest 1]: is an issue that we have. And that is also something we should think about it. But to
[Guest 1]: your point about Bomzuka and Sudhanshu's point there, I would say that is a problem of the
[Guest 1]: 20th century. I would say till before the 20th century, you could not really take out
[Guest 1]: percentages of the population of your city or of your country. You know, so as I see
[Guest 1]: individual person, you could not. I mean, with the birth of new clear weapons, poisonous,
[Guest 1]: I mean, neurotoxin type, the VX poison, chemical weapons and biological weapons, now, an individual
[Guest 1]: can take out half of the world or all of the world. And this is a problem. And this did
[Guest 1]: not exist. And my experience from law is that law takes around 300 years to solve a problem.
[Guest 1]: That's the fastest law works. Look, how long did it take us to find out that everybody
[Guest 1]: should get a right to vote? Okay, it took us 20,000 years of civilization, I would say,
[Guest 1]: to come to democracy, pretty still pretty bad at working. So my rough estimate is it
[Guest 1]: takes about 300 years for law to come to a conclusion about that part. So I think weapons
[Guest 1]: of mass destruction are just too early for us to wrap our head around and solve it. I
[Guest 1]: think we are doing very good at it. We have only used them twice. 50 years, we haven't
[Guest 1]: used them quite surprising. But it seems there's some sense prevailing. I mean, I suspect Sadangshu
[Amit Varma]: would say that that is an argument for deterrence. And that is what but deterrence can work between
[Amit Varma]: states which are by and large rational actors. If you give every human being a bomb Zuka,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what role deterrence plays there. Some nutcase is going to say
[Guest 2]: Sanyam Bhutani Of course, that and that is the risk we have to bear. That's I mean, there's
[Guest 2]: no other way. Do you want to draw a line, then show me where you will draw the line
[Guest 2]: and for what reasons, then I might be able to agree with you. As far as I see, I don't
[Guest 2]: see why you should not draw a line at let's say matchstick because I could basically set
[Guest 2]: this studio on fire right away. Are you going to ban matchsticks? Or are you going to ban
[Guest 2]: spoons because I'm getting fat?
[Amit Varma]: Sanyam Bhutani That's that's a good point. Are you going
[Amit Varma]: to ban sugar? No sugar is poison, but bloody hell people have a right to consume poison,
[Amit Varma]: the classic libertarian position. So it's been really stimulating conversation for me
[Amit Varma]: and I'm going to take time to process all of this. So I'm not going to say I've changed
[Amit Varma]: my mind and you've convinced me and I can't even say that because you guys have actually
[Amit Varma]: made slightly separate arguments. But I am I'm pretty sure Sudhanshu though I have to
[Amit Varma]: say with great regret that I don't think I'll quite go on the line of the bomb Zucca being
[Amit Varma]: available over the counter. But I might get myself to agree with Shubha but that could
[Amit Varma]: be a failure of imagination on my part. My purpose for this episode really was we were
[Amit Varma]: chatting over this at dinner the other night and I thought this is a very stimulating discussion.
[Amit Varma]: I am being forced to reconsider some of my positions whether I change my mind or not.
[Amit Varma]: Let's put these arguments out there on the table. The final question I'd asked before
[Amit Varma]: I sort of ended is that are we discussing that in a utopian world, this should be what
[Amit Varma]: the law should be like? Or are both of you saying that in India today as it is as things
[Amit Varma]: stand, this is our position. This is what we should do.
[Guest 2]: Sanyam Bhutani So I would say in a utopian world,
[Amit Varma]: Sadhguru But I'm asking what the India of today.
[Guest 2]: Sanyam Bhutani Okay. No, no, no. I'll come to both points
[Guest 2]: actually. In a utopian world, yes, every adult should be able to have a gun whether they
[Guest 2]: want it or not is their problem. Okay. In India, as things stand today, every adult
[Guest 2]: should be able to get a gun because our state is incapable of protecting us. And there are
[Guest 2]: already five, four, seven crores illegal guns roaming around. So I don't see how the number
[Guest 2]: going maybe 15 crore or 20 crore is going to be a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Sadhguru Right. So that's your position that you're
[Amit Varma]: not talking about utopia. This is your position now. Shobha, what about you?
[Guest 1]: Shobha So my position is again, if we do bans, we
[Guest 1]: stop thinking about it. Yeah, we can't stop thinking about the citizens right to defend
[Guest 1]: themselves out at all times. I'm not arguing for changing the law today. All I'm asking
[Guest 1]: is the same point that lot more Indians to pay attention to the Arms Act to pay attention
[Guest 1]: to the debate. And I'm okay with the democratic debate coming up with some solution. I am
[Guest 1]: unhappy with the presumption that a lot of us Indian elites do that the current equilibrium
[Guest 1]: is good and stable. I'm saying let's have a debate. Let's debate and maybe after a debate,
[Guest 1]: we can come back to the same position. But let us have the debate and I would like that
[Guest 1]: debate to be open all the time. Situation change before the Bombay attacks. I think
[Guest 1]: that situation was different for urban elites, but it was very similar for Kashmiri victims
[Guest 1]: and victims in Naxal prone areas. I think we should have this debate all the time. That
[Guest 1]: is why we have a permanent legislature that we should have this debate and you know, we
[Guest 1]: Indian elites have to carry this intellectualism on this. We can't say the person who says
[Guest 1]: that no, the gun laws in India are bad to just close that debate and I'm thankful that
[Guest 1]: you're opening the debate here and we'll get nuances.
[Amit Varma]: And then my immediate response to that though I meant to end it but what can I do my overactive
[Amit Varma]: brain keeps ticking and my immediate thought to that not a response not an argument against
[Amit Varma]: it is that affairs in human life and even for states are driven largely by inertia,
[Amit Varma]: that this is a law that exists is going to continue to exist unless there is a crisis
[Amit Varma]: which will make people reconsider it. And the only kind of crisis that I can envisage
[Amit Varma]: that will make people reconsider it is if the state is so oppressive that the need for
[Amit Varma]: guns is so acutely felt that there is public demand for it which hasn't happened so far
[Amit Varma]: in our history. But then if the state is so acutely oppressive, then there's no point
[Guest 2]: to the public demand. So we kind of start I would argue the state is that kind of oppressive.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you don't feel it maybe maybe a Kashmiri feels it maybe you don't know I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you and I feel that oppression is normalized, you know, so it is not that you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of you made the point about how everything can change overnight. But I think that oppression
[Amit Varma]: is normalized so much that we don't feel the need to resist. I knew you'd nod your head
[Amit Varma]: at that.
[Guest 1]: I look at it I see the defense against the state as a smaller debate in the gun issue.
[Guest 1]: Okay, more against defense against other bad citizens, other individuals, other individuals.
[Guest 1]: And there I think, see the fact that there are five crore unregistered guns is that if
[Guest 1]: it is that some people are sold it amongst themselves without working about the democracy,
[Guest 1]: but I think the role of elites in this country is, I would say magnified, we play a bigger
[Guest 1]: role, we have to make sure the debate happens. And we have to make sure the debate happened.
[Guest 1]: I don't agree with the way you're thinking about democracy that demand will come and
[Guest 1]: only then the rational solution will come. It's the job of the elites to give good solutions.
[Guest 1]: And to give good solutions, you have to be experts on the topic. And you have to start
[Guest 1]: thinking about it. It's not my primary topic of interest or research, but we have to do
[Guest 1]: these and keep debating them even if we are not changing any law. So at the time when
[Guest 1]: we change laws, we don't go for some other extreme, like I would say, Sudan, choose extreme
[Guest 1]: that you have to be you have to allow extreme weapons or we can have that debate and then
[Guest 1]: let the democracy decide where we want to go about it.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll end this episode with I mean, since you pointed out the distinction between self
[Amit Varma]: defense against the state and self defense against others, I'll end this episode by plugging
[Amit Varma]: an old episode of mine, which will be linked from the show notes, where the philosopher
[Amit Varma]: Jason Brennan made an argument on the show that those rights should be exactly equivalent
[Amit Varma]: in any situation where you have a right to defend yourself or others against private
[Amit Varma]: individuals, you should have this exact same right with no added consideration to defend
[Amit Varma]: yourself against the state.
[Guest 2]: Shubham Sudhanshu, sorry, you want to add a point?
[Guest 2]: I agree with that way of analysis. So I don't see how I can put a primacy over my defense
[Guest 2]: against another individual or my defense against the state. I will treat them equally.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Sudhanshu, Shubham, thank you so much for coming on the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Shubham at Twitter at Roy Shubham.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't follow Sudhanshu because he doesn't want people to follow him. He's kind
[Amit Varma]: of a paranoid guy. And do you have one of those six crore unofficial guns with you?
[Amit Varma]: I can't answer that.
[Amit Varma]: He can't answer that. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at scene unseen.in, thinkbragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com. The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: and Independence Center for Research and Education in Public Policy. Takshashila offers 12 week
[Amit Varma]: courses in public policy, technology policy, strategic studies for both full time students
[Amit Varma]: and working professionals. Visit takshashila.org.in for more details. Thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: and hey listen, stay safe.
[Unknown]: Hi I'm Sariya Natarajan and I'm Alok Prasanna Kumar and we are the hosts of the Gana Tantra
[Unknown]: podcast. On this podcast, we speak to academics, social scientists, journalists and activists
[Unknown]: to find out what's actually going on in Indian politics. On this podcast, we stay away from
[Unknown]: personality politics, intrigue and gossip and instead focus on the data, research and
[Unknown]: analysis that drives all this. So tune in to the Gana Tantra podcast where new episodes
[Unknown]: are out every Wednesday on the IVM podcast app, website or wherever you listen to your
[Unknown]: podcasts.
[Unknown]: Hi I'm Satyajit. Hi I'm Racheta. We are from the Open Library Project and we host a podcast
[Unknown]: called Paperback. Paperback is a podcast where we engage with stalwarts and experts from
[Unknown]: various industries, suggesting nonfiction titles that contributed to their journey in
[Unknown]: a big way. We've had guests like Anjali Raina, Dr. Marcus Rani, Dr. Swati Lodha, Ambiparameswaran,
[Unknown]: Apoorva Damani and many more on our show Paperback. Find new episodes every Wednesday on IVM podcast
[Unknown]: app, website or wherever you listen to podcasts.